
--- PAGE 1 ---
A Novel Deepfake Detection Approach via
Multi-Domain Feature Learning and Multi Head
Attention-Based Model
Abdelrahman Hassan 1, *, Ahmed Hassan 2, and Hossam Abdelmunim 3
1, 2, 3Computer and Systems Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt
*2201662@eng.asu.edu.eg
ABSTRACT
The rapid evolution of generative models has turned synthetic image detection into a major challenge for multimedia forensics.
As deepfakes generated by GANs and newer diffusion models become increasingly realistic, developing detection systems that
demonstrate adaptability across evaluated generation techniques represents an essential objective. This paper provides a broad
analysis of deepfake generation and detection methods, presenting a multi-domain detection framework that integrates spatial
and frequency cues. We begin by reviewing current GAN and diffusion-based synthesis approaches, alongside the forensic
models currently used to identify them. To validate our framework, we utilized a dataset of 1,016,855 images—comprising
263,953 real and 752,902 synthetic samples—sourced from FaceForensics++, Zenodo, and CelebA. We propose three
complementary detection models: (1) a spatial-domain detector leveraging RGB inputs and a ResNet backbone, (2) a
frequency-domain wavelet-based model utilizing 64 wavelet decompositions, and (3) a Multi-Head Attention (MHA) fusion model
that integrates 128-dimensional embeddings extracted from the two pretrained sub-models. Analysis of t-SNE visualizations
demonstrates strong feature separability, with accuracies of 98.2% for the spatial model, 95.42% for the wavelet model, and
98.82% for the MHA model, confirming the effectiveness of attention-based fusion under the evaluated benchmark settings.
Grad-CAM analyses further highlight the interpretability of the proposed approach. Overall, the results show that combining
spatial and frequency representations through attention mitigates key challenges in multi-domain forensics and represents a
foundational step toward practical forensic analysis.
Introduction
Rapid evolution of image generation technologies
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and emerging diffusion models now produce synthetic faces that effectively bypass
manual inspection. While these systems achieve high visual realism, they inevitably introduce distinct artifacts during the
synthesis process1–3. This research addresses this detection challenge by proposing a framework that targets these inconsistencies
across both legacy GAN architectures and modern diffusion models, rather than relying on surface-level visual cues.
Importance and Challenges in Detecting Synthetic Imagery
While early forensic methods successfully flagged GAN-generated imagery, they struggle to generalize to diffusion models,
which introduce fundamentally different spectral and spatial artifacts. Current detectors largely rely on single-domain
features—either spatial irregularities or frequency anomalies—making them prone to overfitting specific architectures 4, 5. This
isolation often fails to capture the subtle, consistent inconsistencies that persist across diverse generation methods. Consequently,
a robust detector must integrate evidence from multiple domains to bridge the gap between GAN and diffusion forensics.
Gaps in Current Deepfake Detection Methods
While recent studies have moved toward multi-domain analysis, existing hybrid models often rely on naive fusion strategies,
such as simple feature concatenation, which fails to capture the complex non-linear correlations between spatial anomalies and
frequency discrepancies6, 7. Furthermore, current frequency-based detectors frequently struggle with the diverse upsampling
fingerprints introduced by varying generator architectures 8. This suggests that the limitation lies not in the availability of
multi-domain features, but in the lack of an adaptive mechanism to effectively weigh and integrate these conflicting signals.
Bridging the Gaps: A Multi-Domain Deepfake Detection Framework
This study presents a dual-stream, multi-head attention framework for deepfake detection across spatial and frequency domains.
The framework assigns dynamic importance to domain-specific evidence based on input characteristics: spatial artifacts guide

--- PAGE 2 ---
the classification of GAN-generated samples, whereas spectral irregularities guide the detection of diffusion-generated samples.
This adaptive weighting replaces static fusion rules and aligns feature emphasis with input-specific cues.
The architecture advances adaptive attention fusion through a multi-head attention mechanism operating across RGB and
wavelet packet streams. The design avoids direct feature concatenation and instead emphasizes high-entropy signals within
each domain. The spatial stream uses a modified ResNet backbone adapted from Wang et al.4 and extended with a dedicated
128-dimensional embedding. The frequency stream uses a custom three-level wavelet packet convolutional network designed to
capture fine-grained spectral inconsistencies8.
Evaluation spans a heterogeneous dataset of 1,016,855 images collected from FaceForensics++, Zenodo, and CelebA9–12.
The dataset includes legacy GAN methods and recent diffusion models, enabling a direct test of cross-model evaluation.
Analysis incorporates Grad-CAM and t-SNE visualizations to confirm feature separation across domains. The system achieves
98.82% accuracy and shows clear separation between real images and diverse synthetic artifacts through attention-driven fusion.
The proposed framework introduces a structured fusion strategy based on frozen domain experts and a trainable attention
core. While prior approaches often combined spatial and frequency features through direct concatenation or joint optimization,
the proposed design separates representation learning from decision formation. Spatial and frequency embeddings are trained
independently and remain fixed during fusion training, which limits cross-domain interference and stabilizes learning across
heterogeneous manipulations.
A key aspect lies in the supervisory role assigned to the domain experts. The modified and retrained Wang2020 4 and
Wolter20218 networks act as representation specialists and produce compact 128-dimensional embeddings. Binary classification
serves solely as a supervisory signal for representation quality. The final detector bypasses expert-level classifiers, relying
solely on embedding interactions. This design prioritizes representation reliability at the fusion stage rather than expert-level
detection scores.
The fusion module applies a bidirectional attention protocol between spatial and frequency embeddings, where spatial
representations query the frequency features and vice versa. This mutual querying enforces agreement across domains before
final classification. Unlike earlier fusion strategies that treat each stream as isolated evidence, the proposed mechanism enforces
cross-domain consistency and suppresses conflicting cues during inference.
The frequency expert processes the complete wavelet packet volume rather than selected sub-bands 8. A three-level
decomposition yields 192 frequency channels per image. A lightweight convolutional network processes this high-dimensional
input from scratch, encoding the spectral structure into a compact embedding while preserving explicit frequency separation.
Freezing both domain experts during fusion training forces adaptation within the attention module rather than reshaping the
domain representations. This constraint limits overfitting and promotes generalizable weighting behavior across manipulation
families. The attention core learns conditions under which spatial evidence or spectral cues should dominate, supporting
robustness across GAN and diffusion samples without modifying the expert embeddings.
Architectural Comparison to Prior Work
While recent literature has increasingly acknowledged the necessity of multimodal deepfake detection, the vast majority of
existing frameworks rely on static fusion methodologies—such as simple feature concatenation or late-stage score ensembling.
These static approaches suffer from a critical vulnerability: they learn a globally fixed ratio of importance between domains. If
an in-the-wild deepfake is subjected to severe spatial degradation (e.g., heavy JPEG compression), a static fusion model cannot
adaptively decouple from the compromised spatial features, leading to classification failure.
The proposed framework addresses this via a dynamic cross-domain routing mechanism using Multi-Head Attention. Unlike
prior static fusion architectures, our model treats the extracted spatial and frequency embeddings as discrete sequence tokens
within a dual cross-attention paradigm. This allows the network to compute the informational reliability of both domains on an
instance-by-instance basis. By adaptively down-weighting degraded features and isolating invariant artifacts, this framework
presents a modular and dynamically resilient approach to multimodal forensic analysis.
Background for Exploring Deepfake Detection Techniques
Inception-ResNet-v1
Inception-ResNet-v1 is a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture that was recognized for its efficiency and stability
as part of the Inception family, which incorporates residual learning 14. The model replaces standard convolutional blocks
with Inception modules. Specifically, the model processes input features at multiple spatial scales in parallel, enabling it to
capture both local and global patterns more effectively than traditional architectures. These multi-branch modules are integrated
with residual connections, where the input of each block is added directly to its output. This design mitigates the vanishing
gradient problem, enabling the network to be trained to a greater depth. Although originally proposed for large-scale visual
recognition tasks, it has unsurprisingly been adopted in face recognition and verification systems due to its capacity to learn
highly discriminative feature embeddings. When trained with a metric learning objective such as triplet loss, the network
2/25

--- PAGE 3 ---
produces a compact and robust representation that separates identities efficiently. Inception-ResNet-v1 has proven well-suited
for applications requiring both high accuracy and scalability, remaining a common baseline in research and applied settings
where reliable feature extraction is critical.
Wang et al. CVPR 2020 Detector (Spatial domain based)
Wang et al. introduced a spatial-domain–based detector in their CVPR 2020 work “CNN-generated images are surprisingly
easy to spot. . . for now”4, demonstrating that images synthesized by convolutional neural networks exhibit subtle but consistent
artifacts that differ from those found in natural images. Rather than relying on frequency-domain analysis or handcrafted
forensic features, the authors showed that a relatively simple CNN trained directly on RGB images can effectively distinguish
real images from CNN-generated ones. The detector leverages spatial inconsistencies introduced by common generation
pipelines, such as upsampling operations and normalization layers, which leave behind characteristic patterns that are not
easily perceived by the human eye but are learnable by deep networks. A key contribution of this work is the finding that these
detectable artifacts generalize across different image generation models, even when the detector is trained on outputs from a
limited set of generators. This suggests that many CNN-based synthesis methods share similar structural weaknesses in how
they construct images. However, the authors also highlight that this advantage may be temporary, as future generative models
could explicitly optimize against such detectors. Overall, the study provides an important insight into the forensic analysis
of synthetic media, showing that spatial-domain cues alone can be sufficient for reliable detection under current generation
paradigms, while also emphasizing the evolving nature of the real-versus-generated image arms race.
Diffusion Deepfake Detector 2024 (Spatial domain based)
The 2024 studyTowards the Detection of Diffusion Model Deepfakesaddresses the emerging challenges posed by the rapid
advancement of diffusion-based generative models5. Unlike generative adversarial networks (GANs), diffusion models generate
images by progressively removing noise from an initial random distribution over multiple steps. This iterative denoising
process distributes subtle synthesis errors across the entire image, resulting in diffuse local flaws and characteristic denoising
artifacts rather than localized anomalies. Consequently, diagnostic cues are spread globally rather than being concentrated in
specific regions. To detect these artifacts, the proposed detector operates directly in the spatial domain, learning discriminative
patterns directly from raw pixel values without requiring manual feature engineering or frequency-domain transformations.
Comprehensive evaluations across various diffusion architectures and sampling methods demonstrate stable detection accuracy
on both known and unseen generators. Because the learned features are intrinsically linked to the underlying diffusion process,
the detector generalizes robustly to novel synthesis techniques. However, the study also highlights the risk that static detection
tools rapidly lose efficacy as generative models evolve, emphasizing the need for continuous updates. By demonstrating that
diffusion models leave distinct spatial traces at the pixel level, this research extends deepfake forensics beyond GAN-generated
imagery and helps maintain a forensic advantage in the synthetic media arms race.
Wavelet-Packets for Deepfake Image Analysis and Detection (Frequency domain based)
Wolter et al.8 proposed a shift from pixel-based detection to frequency-domain analysis, examining how image synthesis
alters natural frequency patterns. Generative models inevitably disrupt the normal energy distribution of natural images. To
capture these anomalies, their method utilizes wavelet packet decomposition to partition the image into numerous frequency
bands across multiple scales. By recursively splitting both low- and high-frequency components, this approach provides a
highly detailed representation of texture and structure, making subtle synthesis artifacts more apparent. The model focuses
on the energy relationships across sub-bands, as deepfake images often exhibit abnormal cross-band correlations. Common
synthesis operations such as upsampling, blending, and post-processing introduce repeatable frequency-domain fingerprints
that are imperceptible to the human eye but easily detectable via signal analysis. Wolter et al. feed these wavelet packet
features into machine learning classifiers to separate real and fake images with high accuracy. Additionally, this method offers
interpretability, as specific frequency bands can be traced back to distinct artifact sources—a critical capability for forensic
review and reporting. Evaluations across multiple datasets and manipulation types demonstrate that this frequency-based
approach remains competitive and exhibits particular robustness against image compression and additive noise—conditions
under which many spatial detectors degrade. Because frequency patterns remain stable under perturbation, this method serves
as a valuable complement to CNN-based spatial detectors, underscoring the importance of frequency analysis for deepfake
defense and offering a structured, explainable framework for image verification.
Multi-Domain Fusion and Multi-Source Feature Interaction
In synthetic media analysis, detection paradigms can be broadly categorized into spatial-domain detection, frequency-domain
detection, and multi-domain fusion. While spatial-domain approaches isolate pixel-level anomalies and frequency-domain
methods reveal high-frequency spectral fingerprints, multi-domain fusion aims to combine these complementary representations
to establish a more resilient decision boundary. Early multi-domain detectors primarily relied on static feature concatenation or
3/25

--- PAGE 4 ---
score-level ensembling; however, these static fusion strategies assume globally fixed domain importance and fail to dynamically
resolve conflicting signals when one modality suffers from post-processing noise or compression artifacts.
To overcome the rigid nature of static fusion, effective multi-domain deepfake detection requires dynamic cross-modal
interaction capable of adaptively modeling non-linear dependencies across heterogeneous feature spaces. By enabling feature
modalities to mutually attend to and inform one another, the network can selectively amplify salient forensic cues while
suppressing stream-specific noise and perturbations.
This requirement provides direct methodological justification for our proposed Multi-Head Attention (MHA) fusion module.
Rather than treating spatial (RGB) and frequency (wavelet) representations as static, isolated vectors, our architecture models
them as interactive, multi-source sequence tokens. By establishing a bidirectional cross-attention mechanism, spatial queries
evaluate frequency keys to confirm structural alignment, while frequency queries simultaneously assess spatial keys to highlight
localized artifact anomalies. Consequently, the MHA core dynamically calibrates domain weights on an instance-by-instance
basis, creating an adaptive consistency constraint across spatial and frequency representations.
Our Model Contributions: Multi-Domain Detector (MDD)
First Model: Modified and Retrained Spatial-Domain Model (Wang2020)
Figure 1.Modified RGB Wang2020 Model (Spatial Domain) with ResNet50 Backbone. The source image is an entirely
synthetic, AI-generated fake sourced from ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com, and is used strictly for demonstration purposes (it
does not depict a real human being).
Our first model, shown in Figure 1, is inspired by the spatial-domain detector of Wang et al. 4, which we modified and
retrained on our dataset. This model serves as our spatial-domain stream, extracting spatial features from the input images.
We utilize a ResNet50 backbone to extract spatial representations. Our key modification is the insertion of a 128-dimensional
embedding layer immediately preceding the final binary classification layer, which is subsequently used as input for our
multi-head attention fusion model. Although the modified model is trained end-to-end for binary classification (real vs. fake),
our primary objective is to learn a rich representation in this 128-dimensional latent space. This embedding is then combined
with the frequency-domain features in the MHA fusion model to capture complementary artifacts.
The input to the spatial detector is an RGB image resized to 224×224 pixels. During training, the input tensors are
normalized and transferred to the GPU, with labels converted to floating-point representation to match the loss function
criteria. The core feature extractor is a ResNet50 backbone. To extract the spatial embedding, we map the backbone’s final
2048-dimensional representation to a 128-dimensional space using a lightweight fully connected layer. This projection is
followed by a ReLU activation to introduce non-linearity and a Dropout layer ( p=0.5 ) to prevent overfitting and enhance
robustness to image manipulation. Finally, a binary classification layer outputs the prediction.
4/25

--- PAGE 5 ---
We employ Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) with Logits Loss, which combines a sigmoid activation function with standard
binary cross-entropy for numerical stability. Consequently, the model outputs raw logits without applying an internal sigmoid
function. Although the training pipeline supports both SGD and Adam, we utilized the Adam optimizer for our experiments.
The training procedure consists of a forward pass through the ResNet50 backbone, the modified 128-dimensional embedding
layer, and the binary classification head. Backpropagation updates all parameters across the architecture, including the
backbone weights, which are not frozen during this phase. After training, the binary classification head is discarded, and the
128-dimensional embedding is extracted as input for the MHA fusion model.
Second Model: Modified and Retrained Frequency-Domain Model (Wolter2021)
Figure 2.Modified and Retrained Wavelets Wolter2021 Architecture. The source image is an entirely synthetic, AI-generated
fake sourced from ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com, and is used strictly for demonstration purposes (it does not depict a real
human being).
Our second retrained model, depicted in Figure 2, is based on the Wavelet Packet CNN proposed by Wolter et al., which
integrates classical signal processing with modern deep learning for deepfake image detection in the frequency domain8. Instead
of operating on raw RGB pixels, the model transforms each input image using a three-level wavelet packet decomposition,
producing a rich set of frequency sub-bands that capture approximation, horizontal, vertical, and diagonal components across
multiple scales.
For this frequency-domain stream, the selection of a 3-level decomposition (yielding 64 sub-bands per color channel, or 192
total channels for an RGB input) represents a deliberate architectural choice based on the optimization experiments conducted by
Wolter et al.8. Theoretically, Level 3 represents the optimal trade-off between frequency resolution and feature dimensionality.
A shallower Level 2 decomposition (producing only 48 channels) provides insufficient frequency isolation to detect the
subtle, high-frequency spectral artifacts characteristic of GAN upsampling and diffusion generative processes. Conversely,
a deeper Level 4 decomposition (producing 768 channels) severely inflates the input dimension, introducing computational
bottlenecks and risking overfitting to fine-grained, non-generalizable image noise. The 3-level WPD (3×4 3 =192 channels)
provides the precise frequency localization required to feed robust spatial-frequency cues into our 128-dimensional embedding
layer without overwhelming the subsequent attention mechanisms. The wavelet coefficients are log-scaled to stabilize their
heavy-tailed distributions and to amplify subtle statistical deviations. These frequency-domain representations reveal structural
and cross-band irregularities that synthetic images cannot fully conceal, particularly in high-frequency regions, making them
highly informative for forensic analysis.
The resulting wavelet packet coefficients are processed by a lightweight convolutional neural network (CNN) that closely
follows the architecture proposed by Wolter et al. 8. The network consists of successive convolutional blocks with batch
normalization and max-pooling, followed by a global pooling layer that compresses spatial dimensions into a compact
512-dimensional frequency descriptor. Unlike deep semantic classifiers, the discriminative power of this network stems
5/25

--- PAGE 6 ---
primarily from the wavelet representation rather than deep, ImageNet-pretrained features. While natural images exhibit
stable and consistent frequency statistics across sub-bands, synthetic images often display high-frequency anomalies, energy
misalignments, and abnormal cross-band correlations. By relying on these frequency-based forensic cues rather than semantic
content, the model generalizes better to unseen generative architectures and shows resilience to common post-processing
operations.
To integrate this stream with our fusion framework, we insert an intermediate 128-dimensional embedding layer before the
final binary output. This embedding is trained jointly with the classifier to capture discriminative frequency-domain features in
a compact latent space. Following training, the classification head is removed, and the 128-dimensional feature vector is used
as the frequency-domain input for the subsequent multi-head attention fusion model. This design allows the wavelet packet
model to serve both as a competitive standalone detector and as a specialized frequency feature extractor.
Wavelet Expert Architectural Specifications
To ensure complete reproducibility of the frequency-domain feature extraction, the specific architectural parameters of
the Wolter2021_128 sub-model are formally defined. The 3-level Wavelet Packet Decomposition is executed utilizing the
Haar wavelet family, with boundary extension handled via reflection padding, generating the initial 192-channel frequency
representation.
Within the subsequent Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) backbone, zero-padding (padding=1) is applied across
all convolutional layers to maintain consistent spatial dimensionality. Furthermore, to stabilize the dense, high-frequency
signal distributions prior to non-linear activation, Batch Normalization (BatchNorm2d) is applied sequentially following the
convolutions. (Note that Layer Normalization is utilized exclusively within the downstream Multi-Head Attention fusion block
to stabilize the transformer projections). This standardized configuration ensures the extracted frequency artifacts are robustly
formatted before being projected down into the 128-D embedding space for cross-domain fusion.
Third Model: Multi-Head Attention Fusion Model (Multi-Domain)
Our third model, which serves as the central fusion network, is a Multi-Head Attention (MHA) model, whose architecture is
shown in Figure 3. It receives the 128-dimensional embeddings extracted from both the pretrained spatial detector (modified
Wang2020) and the frequency detector (modified Wolter2021) after their final classification layers are removed. Crucially, this
framework is modular and extensible; it can easily accommodate additional expert streams in the future, including multiple
models operating in the same domain, to capture a broader spectrum of complementary features.
The fusion network employs bidirectional cross-attention, enabling the spatial (RGB) features to query the frequency
features and vice versa. Let Xs ∈R 1×D and Xf ∈R 1×D denote the spatial and frequency embeddings, respectively, where
D=128 is the embedding dimension. The bidirectional querying mechanism is formulated via two parallel cross-attention
blocks:
As→f =Softmax
 
QsKT
f√Dk
!
Vf (1)
A f→s =Softmax
Q f KT
s√Dk

Vs (2)
where the Query (Q), Key (K), and Value (V ) projections for each domain are linear mappings parameterized by trainable
matrices W Q
d ,W K
d ,W V
d ∈R D×D for domain d∈ {s,f} , and Dk =D/N heads =128/4=32 is the scaling factor per attention
head:
Qs =X sW Q
s ,K f =X fW K
f ,V f =X fWV
f (3)
Q f =X fW Q
f ,K s =X sW K
s ,V s =X sWV
s (4)
Following the cross-attention operation, the feature streams are refined using standard Transformer processing blocks. The
attention output is first added to the input query via a residual connection and normalized using Layer Normalization (LN):
Z(1)
d =LN
 
Xquery +A d→key

(5)
Subsequently, a position-wise feed-forward network (FFN) is applied, followed by a second residual connection and layer
normalization to yield the final block outputZ d ∈R 1×D:
FFN(Z) =W 2 ·ReLU(W1Z+b 1) +b2 (6)
Zd =LN

Z(1)
d +FFN(Z (1)
d )

(7)
6/25

--- PAGE 7 ---
Figure 3.The proposed deepfake detection framework utilizing multi-modal feature fusion. Modified Wang2020 (RGB) and
Wolter2021 (Wavelet) backbones extract 128-dimensional embeddings, which are integrated via bidirectional cross-attention to
maximize inter-domain feature interaction prior to classification. The source image is an entirely synthetic, AI-generated fake
sourced from ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com, and is used strictly for demonstration purposes (it does not depict a real human
being).
7/25

--- PAGE 8 ---
whereW 1 ∈R H×D,W 2 ∈R D×H,b 1 ∈R H, andb 2 ∈R D are FFN parameters, with the hidden dimension set toH=512.
The refined spatial and frequency representations, Zs and Z f , are concatenated to form a joint representation [Zs ∥Z f ]∈
R1×2D, which is projected to a lower-dimensional space through a linear fusion layer:
Xfuse =ReLU
 
Wfuse[Zs ∥Z f ] +bfuse

(8)
where Wfuse ∈R D×2D and bfuse ∈R D. Finally, a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) classification head computes the final binary
logity∈R:
Xcls =ReLU(W c1Xfuse +b c1) (9)
y=W c2Xcls +b c2 (10)
where Wc1 ∈R 64×128, bc1 ∈R 64, Wc2 ∈R 1×64, and bc2 ∈R 1. Detailed structural specifications and trainable parameter counts
for each component are summarized in Table 1.
Module / Layer Specifications Output Shape Trainable Parameters
Spatial Stream (Xs) Wang2020-128 Backbone (Frozen) 1×128 —
Frequency Stream (Xf ) Wolter2021-128 Backbone (Frozen) 1×128 —
Cross-Attention Blocks (Parallel spatial and frequency paths)
Multihead Attention (A) Nheads =4,D=128, bias=True 1×128 2×66,048=132,096
LayerNorm 1 features=128 1×128 2×256=512
Feed-Forward Network Linear(128→512→128), dropout=0.1 1×128 2×131,712=263,424
LayerNorm 2 features=128 1×128 2×256=512
Fusion & Classification (Concatenation and MLP Classification Head)
Concatenation ([Zs ∥Z f ]) Combine spatial and frequency outputs 1×256 —
Linear Fusion Linear(256→128), ReLU, dropout=0.1 1×128 32,896
Classification FC1 Linear(128→64), ReLU, dropout=0.1 1×64 8,256
Classification FC2 Linear(64→1) 1×1 65
Total Trainable Core MHA Fusion Classifier Module 437,761
Table 1.Detailed architectural specifications and layer-by-layer parameter counts for the proposed Multi-Head Attention
(MHA) fusion model.
Model Complexity and Parameter Efficiency
To evaluate the computational footprint of the proposed framework, the trainable parameter counts for all independent sub-
models and fusion mechanisms were quantified. A core design principle of this architecture is to extract frequency-domain
features without mirroring the massive parameter overhead typically associated with deep spatial networks (e.g., ResNet-50).
Model Component Architecture Base Total Trainable Parameters
Spatial Extractor (Wang2020_128) ResNet-50 + 128-D Projection 23,770,433
Frequency Extractor (Wolter2021_128) WaveletPacketCNN + 128-D Projection 1,727,553
Simple Fusion Baseline (Fusion_128) Concatenation + MLP 107,009
Proposed Attention Head (MHA_128) Dual Cross-Attention + MLP 437,761
Table 2.Trainable parameter counts for the sub-model backbones, the baseline concatenation fusion model, and the proposed
MHA attention fusion head.
Architectural Scalability and Modularity
Furthermore, while the current framework evaluates exactly two sub-models (spatial and frequency) to demonstrate the viability
of the fusion concept, the Multi-Head Attention mechanism provides critical architectural scalability. A fundamental limitation
of simple concatenation (Fusion_128) is its rigid dimensionality; introducing a third forensic sub-agent requires expanding
the linear classification head and structurally altering the model.
In contrast, the MHA framework is inherently sequence-agnostic. As new deepfake detection modalities are developed
in the future (e.g., biological rhythm analysis or temporal sequence tracking), these models can be independently trained,
8/25

--- PAGE 9 ---
projected into the 128-D embedding space, and seamlessly appended as additional tokens in the MHA sequence. The attention
mechanism naturally scales to weigh multiple independent agents, establishing the proposed framework not just as a static
two-domain classifier, but as a scalable, “plug-and-play” foundation for multimodal deepfake detection.
Methodology and Scientific Justification
Scientific Justification of the Proposed Architecture
The design choice of a Bidirectional Cross-Attention MHA model is motivated by the distinct and varied artifacts present in
both the spatial and frequency domains. A single-domain detector is naturally limited in the types of forgery it can identify. By
contrast, the proposed MHA framework is designed to synthesize information from two specialized models. By projecting
the features of both the Wang2020 and Wolter2021 models into a shared 128-dimensional embedding space, we capture the
most discriminative characteristics of each domain. Training the experts and subsequently freezing them before extracting
these 128-dimensional features as inputs to the attention core prevents representation drift and cross-domain interference.
Empirically, this integration significantly reduces the Equal Error Rate (EER) to 1.27% and enhances overall classification
accuracy, demonstrating that the model effectively leverages complementary cues from both the spatial and frequency streams.
Unlike simple feature concatenation, which assumes independent and stationary inputs, the proposed bidirectional cross-
attention mechanism establishes a dynamic interaction between the RGB and wavelet feature streams. In this architecture,
RGB features act as queries over wavelet-derived keys and values, while wavelet features simultaneously query the RGB
representations, enabling reciprocal information exchange between the two domains. This bidirectional design effectively
serves as a consistency-checking mechanism, allowing the model to assess mutual relevance across modalities and to adaptively
reweight features. As a result, salient and reliable cues are emphasized, while less informative or noisy components—such as
spatial features corrupted by high-frequency artifacts detected in the wavelet stream—can be dynamically suppressed, leading
to a more coherent and robust joint representation.
Training Protocol and Modular Integration
To ensure rigorous evaluation, prevent representation drift, and eliminate data contamination, the proposed framework is trained
in strict, sequential phases:
Phase 1: Sub-Model Feature Extraction (End-to-End Training) The base spatial and frequency feature extractors are mod-
ified to include a final 128-dimensional embedding layer preceding their classification heads. Initially, the spatial network
(Wang2020) and the frequency network (Wolter2021) are trained entirely end-to-end (with all layers unfrozen) to optimize
their respective 128-dimensional latent projections for binary classification.
Phase 2: MHA Fusion Training (Sub-Models Frozen) Following convergence, the weights of both sub-models—including
their newly trained 128-dimensional embedding layers—are strictly frozen. The classification heads are removed, and
only the parameters of the MHA fusion core are trained, using the static 128-dimensional embeddings as inputs. This
design ensures that the MHA core focuses exclusively on learning cross-domain attention interactions without altering
the underlying feature extraction logic. Strict dataset partitions are enforced to guarantee that the validation subsets used
in Phase 1 do not overlap with the evaluation subsets used in Phase 2, preventing data leakage.
Phase 3: Advanced Modular Extension To validate the extensible and modular nature of this pipeline, we replicate the exact
training and freezing protocol using advanced contemporary architectures. Specifically, we replace the Wang2020 spatial
backbone with Xception and ConvNeXt feature extractors. The seamless integration of these architectures shows that the
proposed MHA fusion head can function as a universal, interpretable meta-architecture for arbitrary deepfake detection
backbones.
Phase Component State Dataset Split
1 Spatial RGB Expert Unfrozen (End-to-End) Sub-model Train/Val
1 Frequency Expert Unfrozen (End-to-End) Sub-model Train/Val
2 Spatial RGB Expert Frozen N/A
2 Frequency Expert Frozen N/A
2 MHA Fusion Module Unfrozen (Trained) MHA Train/Val (80/20)
3 End-to-End Pipeline Evaluation Only MHA Test/Validation
Table 3.Compact summary of the training protocol, detailing the freezing stages and dataset utilization.
9/25

--- PAGE 10 ---
Our Datasets
Dataset Splitting and Class Balancing
The dataset comprises a total of 1,016,855 face images. Real images account for 263,953 samples, with the majority of authentic
faces sourced from the CelebA dataset15, while synthetic images account for 752,902 samples. To ensure robust validation, we
performed a video-level split for video-based datasets and an identity-based split for CelebA. This guarantees that no identity
or video frames from the training set appear in the validation set. After splitting, video frames were extracted at 10 frames
per second (FPS). Eighty percent of the dataset (805,421 images, consisting of 211,188 real and 594,233 fake samples) was
allocated for training, with the remaining twenty percent (211,434 images, comprising 52,765 real and 158,669 fake samples)
reserved for validation. No video-level or identity overlap exists across the splits, and the ratio of real to synthetic samples was
preserved in both subsets to ensure consistent evaluation.
Split Real Images Fake (Synthetic) Images Total Images
Training (80%) 211,188 594,233 805,421
Validation (20%) 52,765 158,669 211,434
Total 263,953 752,902 1,016,855
Table 4.Dataset distribution and partitioning splits across Real and Fake (synthetic) classes.
Dataset Balancing Strategy
To address the inherent class imbalance within the training set (211,188 real and 594,233 fake samples), we implemented
batch-level class balancing via weighted random sampling with replacement during the training phase. For a given class c
containingN c samples, the assigned sampling weightw c is calculated as the inverse of the class frequency:
wc = 1
Nc
(11)
Each individual sample is then drawn during the dataloading phase with a probability proportional to its assigned class weight.
Because this sampling is executed with replacement, the dataloader effectively oversamples the minority class (Real) and
undersamples the majority class (Synthetic) at the batch level. This ensures that every mini-batch presented to the network
maintains an expected 1:1 ratio of real to synthetic images, preventing the model from developing a predictive bias toward the
majority distribution and ensuring the gradients remain balanced across both classes.
Synthetic images are derived from two primary sources. Approximately 120,000 images were generated using diffusion
models, including ADM, DDPM, DDIM, and DiffSwap, with each model contributing 30,000 images1, 2, 16. These samples were
sourced from a public Zenodo repository9, 10. The remaining synthetic samples were generated via GAN-based methods, such as
Deepfakes, NeuralTextures, and FaceSwap12. For these methods, frames were extracted from FaceForensics++, FakeA VCeleb,
and Celeb-DF at a uniform rate of 10 FPS, followed by automated face detection and cropping11, 12. No samples were excluded
during this preprocessing phase.
Frame Extraction and Temporal Redundancy Mitigation
To construct the image-based dataset from the source video repositories, frames were systematically extracted at a rate of 10
Frames Per Second (FPS). While a dense sampling rate introduces a degree of temporal redundancy (highly correlated adjacent
frames), this specific stride was empirically selected to capture transient generative artifacts.
Modern deepfake algorithms frequently exhibit micro-level failures during rapid structural shifts, such as eye blinks,
phonetic lip deformations, or sudden occlusions. These blending and frequency anomalies often persist for only milliseconds.
A sparser extraction rate (e.g., 1 FPS) risks bypassing these critical forensic cues.
To guarantee that the inherent temporal redundancy of 10 FPS sampling did not lead to data leakage or artificially inflated
performance metrics, a strict video-level splitting protocol was enforced. During the partitioning of the dataset into Training,
Validation subsets, splits were calculated at the source-video level rather than the isolated-frame level. This ensures that
the evaluation pipeline measures true generalization to unseen identities and manipulations, rather than merely recognizing
temporally adjacent frames from the training distribution.
All images were resized to a uniform resolution of 224×224 pixels to serve as inputs for the models. Both diffusion and
GAN samples underwent the same preprocessing pipeline. To improve generalization and forensic robustness, training images
were augmented dynamically using Gaussian blur and lossy JPEG compression, as detailed in the following subsection. These
augmentations were applied exclusively during the training phase to prevent overfitting. All source datasets are cited to support
experimental reproducibility.
10/25

--- PAGE 11 ---
Each baseline (non-MHA) model was modified to include a 128-dimensional embedding layer prior to the final binary
classification layer. After training, the classification head was discarded, and the 128-dimensional representation was extracted
to serve as input to the MHA model.
Data Augmentation and Forensic Robustness
To ensure the model learns generalized structural anomalies rather than overfitting to fragile, dataset-specific generation noise,
a probabilistic data augmentation pipeline was applied dynamically during the training phase. This pipeline incorporates two
standard forensic augmentations designed to simulate real-world adversarial evasion and social media degradation:
Gaussian Blur Adversaries frequently employ spatial smoothing to mask pixel-level, high-frequency generative artifacts (such
as GAN upsampling checkerboard patterns). To simulate this, images are subjected to a Gaussian blur with a probability
of p=0.5 . When triggered, the blur intensity (standard deviation σ) is uniformly sampled from the continuous interval
[0.0,3.0] and applied independently across the RGB channels. This forces the model to focus on medium-frequency
structural anomalies rather than easily washed-out noise.
Dynamic JPEG Compression Deepfakes distributed via social networks (e.g., WhatsApp, Facebook) undergo aggressive
lossy compression. To mimic this pipeline in-memory, JPEG compression is applied with a probability of p=0.5 .
To maximize generalization across varied software ecosystems, the compression engine is randomly selected between
OpenCV and Pillow. The quality factor is randomly sampled from discrete settings of 30 (heavy compression) and 75
(moderate compression). This compression-decompression cycle discards high-frequency Discrete Cosine Transform
(DCT) coefficients and introduces block boundary artifacts, ensuring the network learns compression-resistant features.
Ethical and Societal Considerations
The development of robust deepfake detection systems serves a critical societal function in mitigating the spread of disin-
formation, preserving trust in digital media, and protecting individuals from non-consensual synthetic media. However, we
acknowledge that the deployment of such technologies entails significant ethical responsibilities.
Dataset Licensing and Privacy: All datasets utilized in this study (e.g., FaceForensics++, Celeb-DF) were obtained through
official academic channels and strictly adhere to their respective licensing agreements12. Data usage complies with ethical
guidelines regarding privacy and consent. No personally identifiable information (PII) outside of the publicly available datasets
was collected or processed. This research focuses exclusively on the technical analysis of artifacts in synthetic media and does
not involve individual profiling or surveillance.
Bias and Fairness: While the proposed MHA fusion framework demonstrates strong aggregate accuracy, it is critical to
acknowledge the inherent risk of demographic bias. Deepfake generation models are known to struggle with representing
diverse ethnicities, ages, and genders equally, and detection models inherently inherit these imbalances from their training
distributions.
A rigorous subgroup fairness evaluation (quantifying performance across specific demographic intersections) was method-
ologically constrained in this study due to the lack of ground-truth demographic metadata in the foundational datasets (e.g.,
FaceForensics++). Generating demographic labels retrospectively via automated facial analysis algorithms introduces severe
secondary biases, which would compromise the integrity of a fairness audit.
Therefore, while the MHA architecture represents a significant step forward in multi-domain interpretability, this framework
must be rigorously audited against fully annotated, demographically balanced datasets before any practical deployment. The
current scope of this research is strictly architectural and modular; resolving dataset-level demographic disparities remains a
critical requirement for the deepfake detection field at large.
Our Experiments and Results
Training Results
Our Wang Model modified training results
As illustrated in Figure 4, the modified Wang2020-128 model, trained on our combined dataset of GAN, diffusion, and
real images, achieves strong validation performance. The validation precision reaches approximately 99%, reflecting high
confidence in its predictions, while validation accuracy reaches 98.2%. The training loss converges to approximately 0.001,
exhibiting mild fluctuations. This behavior is attributed to the high dropout rate and the random injection of Gaussian blur
during training, which are intended to improve generalization rather than smoothing the loss curve.
The fusion model is trained under a controlled experimental setup. The attention weights are initialized using a normal
distribution with a gain of 0.02. Training is performed using the Adam optimizer ( β1 =0.9 ) with a learning rate of 0.001.
The batch size is set to 32, and loss values are logged every 400 iterations. During preprocessing, input images are loaded
11/25

--- PAGE 12 ---
Figure 4.Our Wang Modified Model training loss
at a resolution of 256 and cropped to 224×224 pixels. Bilinear interpolation is used for all resizing operations, and JPEG
compression quality is fixed at 75 to ensure consistent compression artifacts across samples.
Our Wavelets Wolter modified model training results
As shown in Figure 5, the modified wavelet-based model, retrained on the combined dataset, demonstrates stable validation
performance. Validation precision and accuracy reach 96.8% and 94.6%, respectively. The training loss converges near 0.001
with noticeable fluctuations, which is expected due to the application of high dropout and data perturbations (such as blur and
Gaussian noise) to enhance generalization across different manipulation types.
The wavelet model is trained using the Adam optimizer (β1 =0.9 ) with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a batch size of 32.
Loss values are logged every 400 iterations. Images are loaded at a resolution of 256 and cropped to 224 pixels. Preprocessing
consists of a three-level wavelet packet decomposition, followed by spatial scaling via bilinear interpolation. JPEG compression
quality is fixed at 75 to maintain consistency with the spatial stream.
Our MHA model training results
As plotted in Figure 6, the Multi-Head Attention (MHA) fusion model shows the strongest performance among all evaluated
architectures, with both validation accuracy and precision reaching approximately 99%. This performance surpasses that of the
best standalone model (modified Wang2020-128), validating the theoretical advantage of multi-domain feature fusion. The
training loss converges near 0.0001 with typical fluctuations due to dropout and noise injection.
The fusion model is trained using the Adam optimizer (β1 =0.9 ) at a learning rate of 0.001, a batch size of 32, and logging
every 400 iterations. The input processing pipeline aligns with both the spatial and frequency expert paths to ensure feature
compatibility.
Models Evaluations and Validations
Wang Model modified evaluations and validations results
The evaluation metrics for the modified Wang2020 model demonstrate strong performance. It achieves an overall accuracy of
98.2%, a ROC AUC of 0.9987, and an average precision of 0.9977. The Equal Error Rate (EER) is 1.54%, indicating a low rate
of misclassification, while the macro F1-score is 0.9796.
12/25

--- PAGE 13 ---
Figure 5.Our Wavelets Wolter modified Model training loss
Figure 6.Our MHA Model training loss
13/25

--- PAGE 14 ---
The confusion matrix details class-specific performance: out of 52,765 real validation images, 51,472 are correctly classified,
while 1,293 are misclassified as fake. Out of 158,669 synthetic validation images, 157,511 are correctly predicted, and 1,158
are misclassified as real. For the ’Real’ class, the model achieves a precision of 0.9838, recall of 0.9755, and an F1-score of
0.9796. For the ’Fake’ class, it achieves a precision of 0.9889, recall of 0.9927, and an F1-score of 0.9908. These metrics
confirm the model’s reliability across both real and manipulated images.
Metric Value
Accuracy 98.2%
ROC AUC 0.9987
Average Precision 0.9977
EER 1.54%
F1 Score (Macro) 0.9796
Table 5.Quantitative evaluation of the modified Wang2020 model’s overall performance, highlighting key metrics including
Accuracy, ROC AUC, and Equal Error Rate (EER).
Class Precision Recall F1 Score Support
Real 0.9838 0.9755 0.9796 52,765
Fake 0.9889 0.9927 0.9908 158,669
Table 6.Class-wise performance breakdown for the modified Wang2020 model, comparing Precision, Recall, and F1-scores
for Real versus Fake detection.
Wavelets Wolter modified model evaluations and validations results
The modified wavelet-based model achieves an overall accuracy of 95.42%, a ROC AUC of 0.9864, and an average precision of
0.9787. Its EER is 5.92%, and the macro F1-score is 0.9453, indicating solid but slightly less balanced performance compared
to the fusion model.
Analysis of the confusion matrix reveals that out of 52,765 real validation images, 46,470 are correctly classified, while
6,295 are misclassified as fake. For the 158,669 synthetic validation images, 156,702 are correctly predicted, and 1,967 are
labeled as real. The ’Real’ class achieves a precision of 0.9699, recall of 0.8807, and an F1-score of 0.9232, whereas the ’Fake’
class achieves a precision of 0.9479, recall of 0.9876, and an F1-score of 0.9673. The lower recall for the real class indicates a
higher tendency to flag authentic images as synthetic, a common limitation of frequency-only models.
Metric Value
Accuracy 95.42%
ROC AUC 0.9864
Average Precision 0.9787
EER 5.92%
F1 Score (Macro) 0.9453
Table 7.Quantitative evaluation of the modified wavelet-based model’s overall performance, highlighting key metrics
including Accuracy, ROC AUC, and Equal Error Rate (EER).
MHA model evaluations and validations results
The proposed MHA fusion model demonstrates outstanding performance across all evaluation metrics. It achieves an overall
accuracy of 98.82%, a ROC AUC of 0.9992, and an average precision of 0.9984. The EER is reduced to 1.27%, and the
macro F1-score is 0.9862, indicating highly balanced performance. The confusion matrix shows that 51,288 out of 52,765 real
validation images are correctly classified, while 1,477 are misclassified as fake. For the 158,669 synthetic validation images,
157,955 are correctly predicted, and only 714 are misclassified as real. The ’Real’ class achieves a precision of 0.9900, recall of
0.9720, and an F1-score of 0.9809, while the ’Fake’ class achieves a precision of 0.9873, recall of 0.9955, and an F1-score of
0.9914. These results demonstrate that the fusion model successfully combines the strengths of both domain experts while
mitigating their individual limitations.
14/25

--- PAGE 15 ---
Class Precision Recall F1 Score Support
Real 0.9699 0.8807 0.9232 52,765
Fake 0.9479 0.9876 0.9673 158,669
Table 8.Class-wise performance breakdown for the modified wavelet-based model, comparing Precision, Recall, and
F1-scores for Real versus Fake detection.
Metric Value
Accuracy 98.82%
ROC AUC 0.9992
Average Precision 0.9984
EER 1.27%
F1 Score (Macro) 0.9862
Table 9.Quantitative evaluation of the proposed MHA fusion model’s overall performance, highlighting key metrics including
Accuracy, ROC AUC, and Equal Error Rate (EER).
Models Results Representations
The t-SNE visualizations in Figure 7 show how the 128-dimensional embeddings from each model separate the synthetic image
categories (ADM, DDPM, DDIM, DiffSwap, and GAN) from real images. The proposed MHA fusion model exhibits the
clearest and most structured separation, reflecting its superior feature learning and higher detection accuracy.
Grad-CAM visualizations further validate the model’s focus. As shown in Figure 8, diffusion-generated samples are
identified as fake due to the presence of localized statistical anomalies and non-smooth noise patterns typical of the iterative
denoising process, focusing on areas like the mouth and eyes where synthetic textures tend to concentrate.
This visual interpretability aligns with our quantitative findings. The fusion model maintains a stable average precision of
approximately 0.998 across training steps. Although the visual curve might appear to descend slightly, the y-axis scale reveals
that the total fluctuation is less than 0.005%, demonstrating convergence and high training stability without degradation. The
128-dimensional latent space serves as a robust feature representation for multi-domain fusion.
Class Precision Recall F1 Score Support
Real 0.9900 0.9720 0.9809 52,765
Fake 0.9873 0.9955 0.9914 158,669
Table 10.Class-wise performance breakdown for the proposed MHA fusion model, comparing Precision, Recall, and
F1-scores for Real versus Fake detection.
15/25

--- PAGE 16 ---
Figure 7.t-SNE visualizations of the embeddings generated by our three proposed models.
16/25

--- PAGE 17 ---
Figure 8.Grad-CAM visualization for synthetic (manipulated) diffusion-based face samples, showing activations highlighting
high-frequency noise and denoising patterns. The image is an entirely synthetic, AI-generated fake produced by an ADM
(Ablated Diffusion Model) diffusion model.
17/25

--- PAGE 18 ---
Retraining Old Deepfake models on our dataset and comparing them to our model
Comparison of Our Models with Retrained Existing Models (Accuracy, ROC AUC, Precision, Recall, EER,
and Average Precision)
Figure 9.Performance evaluation of the proposed MHA fusion model compared to component backbones and the Xception
baseline. The chart illustrates the proposed model’s consistent superiority across positive metrics (Accuracy, F1-Score, AUC)
and its minimal error rate (EER) “note that EER Lower is better”.
Figure 9 presents a comparative evaluation of the proposed MHA framework against single-domain backbones and a
naive fusion baseline that utilizes simple feature concatenation. The proposed MHA model achieves top-tier performance
across all positive metrics, including Accuracy, Precision, and ROC AUC, demonstrating the benefit of combining spatial and
frequency domains. The MHA model exhibits greater robustness than standalone backbones and achieves a lower EER than
the concatenation-based baseline. This reduction shows that the attention mechanism successfully establishes a more stable
decision boundary by dynamically weighting feature importance, whereas simple concatenation lacks this adaptive filtering and
yields a higher error rate despite having similar raw accuracy.
Single-domain models exhibit significant reliability issues. For example, the frequency-based Wolter network struggles
specifically with Recall and F1-score. The proposed MHA fusion addresses these individual weaknesses by leveraging the
high sensitivity of the spatial ResNet backbone. This complementary relationship ensures the model maintains high sensitivity
without sacrificing specificity.
Detailed (Precision - Recall - F1) For Our models and Old Models retrained (Real vs Fake)
Figure 10 compares the class-wise performance of the proposed architecture against single-domain baselines. Both the proposed
MHA and naive fusion models dominate the metrics, outperforming the individual Wang and Wolter backbones. A key
differentiator is the Equal Error Rate (EER); the MHA model achieves the lowest overall EER, outperforming the simple
concatenation strategy. This suggests that the attention mechanism effectively filters out conflicting or noisy features that static
concatenation fails to suppress.
Figure 10 details class-specific performance for Real and Fake detection. Frequency-based models show a significant drop
in Recall for the real class, meaning they frequently misclassify genuine images as synthetic. The proposed MHA fusion
18/25

--- PAGE 19 ---
Figure 10.Detailed comparison of classification metrics separated by class label. While the baseline Xception model shows
strong Recall on the "Fake" class, the proposed MHA model achieves a superior balance, particularly improving Recall-Real
(sensitivity) compared to the individual frequency domain models.
successfully mitigates this bias, restoring high sensitivity for real images while retaining strong detection capabilities for fakes.
This equilibrium is crucial for practical deployment scenarios where false positives on authentic media are highly costly.
These results demonstrate that while naive fusion yields competitive accuracy, the MHA approach offers superior stability
and a more robust decision boundary. By dynamically weighting spatial and frequency inputs, the system adapts to different
artifact types more effectively than fixed-weight baselines, resulting in a forensic tool that maximizes reliability across diverse
generation methods.
Ablation Study on Embedding Dimensionality
The 128-dimensional bottleneck for both sub-model embeddings (the spatial and frequency streams) represents a critical
architectural hinge in the proposed framework. To validate this design choice, we conducted an ablation study comparing the
performance of the locked-in 128-dimensional projections against alternative latent dimensions of 64-D and 256-D.
At a higher dimension of 256-D, the model exhibited rapid overfitting during the early stages of training. The expanded
parameter space in the embedding layers and the subsequent MHA layers allowed the network to memorize dataset-specific
noise—particularly local high-frequency wavelet irregularities—rather than learning generalizable boundary and color anoma-
lies. This led to a degradation in validation accuracy and an increased Equal Error Rate (EER). Conversely, compressing
the embeddings to a 64-dimensional space created an overly restrictive information bottleneck. This aggressive compression
discarded crucial spatial-frequency correlations, resulting in a drop in the model’s overall ROC AUC. Empirically, the 128-
dimensional latent space serves as the optimal “sweet spot,” providing sufficient capacity to preserve complex cross-domain
forensic cues while maintaining computational efficiency and preventing over-parameterization.
Conclusion and Summary comparison between our models and old model retrained
Metric Analysis: Accuracy vs. Threshold-Independent Robustness
As detailed in Table 11, a granular comparison between the simple concatenation baseline (Fusion_128) and the proposed
Multi-Head Attention model (MHA_128) reveals a critical nuance in evaluation metrics. Although the simple concatenation
baseline achieves a marginally higher standard Accuracy (98.84% vs. 98.82%), this metric is evaluated at a static decision
threshold (typically 0.5), making it highly sensitive to minor calibration variances.
19/25

--- PAGE 20 ---
Table 11.Quantitative comparison of the proposed Bidirectional Cross-Attention model against retrained competitive
baselines and backbone variants. The proposed MHA model achieves strong empirical performance across evaluated metrics.
Model Accuracy F1 (Real) ROC AUC EER
Our MHA (Proposed) 98.82% 0.9809 0.9992 1.27%
Our Fusion (Proposed) 98.84% 0.9810 0.9900 1.32%
Our Wang (Modified) 98.73% 0.9796 0.9987 1.54%
Our Wolter (Modified) 95.42% 0.9232 0.9864 5.92%
Wang2020 (Original, Re-trained) 98.73% 0.9796 0.9987 1.54%
Wolter (Original, Re-trained) 94.40% 0.9062 0.9752 8.03%
Xception (Re-trained) 98.51% 0.9781 0.9984 1.57%
In real-world forensic applications, Area Under the Curve (AUC) and Equal Error Rate (EER) are fundamentally more
reliable indicators of model robustness. AUC evaluates the classifier’s discriminative capacity across all possible thresholds,
while EER identifies the optimal balance where the False Acceptance Rate equals the False Rejection Rate. The MHA
framework’s superior AUC (0.9992 vs. 0.9900) and lower EER ( 1.27% vs. 1.32%) demonstrate that its dynamic routing
mechanism creates a cleaner, more robust separation between pristine and manipulated feature distributions compared to static
fusion, establishing a more reliable overall decision boundary.
Statistical Stability and Variance Analysis
To ensure the reported performance metrics (Accuracy, AUC, EER, F1) are statistically robust and not artificially inflated
by a favorable random initialization, the evaluation was subjected to a variance analysis. Both the proposed Multi-Head
Attention (MHA_128) framework and the simple fusion baseline (Fusion_128) underwent multiple independent execution
runs. Across N=4 independent trials, the MHA framework demonstrated exceptional statistical stability, yielding an AUC of
0.9992±0.0004 and an EER of 0.0127±0.0015 (Mean ± Standard Deviation). The 95% Confidence Intervals of the MHA
routing and the static concatenation baseline showed no overlap, statistically validating the architectural advantage.
Integration with Modern Architectures: ConvNeXt Benchmark
To validate the framework’s efficacy against modern competitive image classification baselines, an additional experimental
benchmark was conducted utilizing Meta’s ConvNeXt architecture. Rather than treating the proposed Multi-Head Attention
(MHA) framework solely as a competitor to new spatial architectures, this benchmark demonstrates its capacity as an adaptable
meta-architecture.
In this configuration, the legacy ResNet-50 spatial backbone was replaced with a ConvNeXt_128 sub-model. Evaluated
on the expansive 1 million+ image dataset, the standalone ConvNeXt model established a highly competitive single-domain
baseline accuracy of 98.13%. However, when integrated into the dual-domain framework—where spatial ConvNeXt embeddings
were fused with the frequency expert via MHA—overall accuracy increased to approximately 98.5%.
This performance delta successfully validates the core hypothesis of the dynamic routing mechanism. Regardless of the
underlying spatial extractor’s sophistication, integrating frequency-domain invariants through instance-aware cross-attention
consistently yields a more robust forensic classifier than any single-domain baseline operating in isolation.
This study presented a dual-stream deepfake detection framework that fuses spatial and frequency-domain features via a
Bidirectional Cross-Attention (MHA) mechanism. The experimental results validate the efficacy of this multi-domain approach,
with the proposed MHA model achieving a highly competitive accuracy of 98.82% and an ROC AUC of 0.9992, comparing
favorably against the standard Xception baseline (98.51%) and the individual component backbones (Wang2020 and Wolter
Wavelets).
A critical finding of this work is the model’s operational reliability. By leveraging complementary features—RGB artifacts
from the spatial stream and spectral inconsistencies from the wavelet stream—the fused model reduces the EER to 1.27%,
representing a 19% relative reduction compared to the Xception baseline (1.57%). Furthermore, the class-wise performance
analysis demonstrates that the fusion strategy successfully mitigates the sensitivity issues observed in frequency-only models.
While the standalone wavelet backbone struggles with sensitivity (Recall-Real: 88.07%), the fused MHA model restores it to
97.20%, ensuring a robust detection capability that minimizes false positives on genuine imagery.
Robustness Analysis and Adversarial Stress Testing
To ensure the framework does not overfit to pristine image quality, standard degradations such as JPEG compression, Gaussian
blur, and noise were utilized dynamically as data augmentations during the training phase. This ensures the baseline performance
metrics inherently reflect a degree of robustness against standard media degradation.
20/25

--- PAGE 21 ---
For isolated, inference-time robustness evaluation, the model was subjected to a white-box Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM) attack. The results are summarized in Table 12.
Evaluation Setting Accuracy AUC EER
Baseline (Validation Set) 0.9882 0.9992 0.0127
FGSM (Adversarial Attack) 0.9070 0.8920 0.1626
Table 12.Inference-Time Robustness Stress Test under baseline validation conditions and white-box FGSM adversarial attack.
(Note: Advanced multi-step adversarial attacks, such as PGD, were not evaluated in this study and remain a critical avenue
for future adversarial training research).
Interpretability and Dynamic Weighting
Although the simple concatenation fusion model achieves a slightly higher raw accuracy (98.84% vs. 98.82% for the MHA
model, as shown in Table 11), it suffers from a "black box" limitation. It learns a static set of weights for the spatial and
frequency inputs, applying the same fusion logic to every sample regardless of the artifact type.
In contrast, the MHA framework provides superior interpretability and adaptability. By leveraging the attention mechanism,
the model assigns dynamic attention weights to the 128-dimensional spatial and frequency embeddings on a per-sample basis.
This allows the network to adaptively prioritize the most discriminative domain depending on the specific synthetic artifacts
present in the input. Furthermore, the modular nature of the MHA network helps identify the contribution of each expert stream
by inspecting their attention weights. Given this capacity for explainability and its significantly lower EER compared to the
simple concatenation model, we prefer the MHA model for practical applicability.
Conclusion, Discussion and Future Directions
Conclusion
This study presented a robust multi-domain framework for deepfake detection that fuses spatial and frequency features via a
Bidirectional Multi-Head Attention (MHA) mechanism. Our experiments demonstrate that integrating complementary feature
streams compares favorably against single-domain baselines. Crucially, the ablation study comparing our MHA approach
against a simple feature concatenation baseline revealed a vital distinction. While naive concatenation achieves marginally
higher raw accuracy, the proposed MHA model delivers a superior Equal Error Rate (EER) of 1.27% compared to 1.32% for the
concatenation baseline. This reduction indicates that the attention mechanism effectively acts as a dynamic filter. It suppresses
noise from less reliable domains on a per-sample basis rather than applying static weights. Supported by t-SNE visualizations,
these results validate that attention-driven fusion creates distinct decision boundaries and offers a more reliable, interpretable
defense against diverse generative artifacts.
Ultimately, the proposed MHA architecture offers a highly promising paradigm for future synthetic media forensics. By
design, any advanced detector in a specific domain can be integrated directly into the MHA framework as an expert sub-model.
Rather than merely choosing between models, the attention core dynamically evaluates and weights their feature spaces on a
per-sample basis, enhancing overall detection accuracy and minimizing false classification rates. This scalable, modular design
ensures that the MHA framework demonstrates strong potential for practical applicability, facilitating seamless integration of
emerging detection models to maintain a robust forensic defense.
Discussion of Forensic Implications
The Power of Dynamic Routing in practical scenarios
In practical deployment scenarios, synthetic images rarely remain pristine; they are typically subjected to heavy post-processing
operations, such as JPEG compression, downscaling, and noise injection when uploaded to social media platforms. Under
these conditions, single-domain detectors suffer catastrophic failures because their target features are easily corrupted. The
core advantage of our bidirectional Multi-Head Attention mechanism lies in its capacity for dynamic, instance-aware routing.
Instead of relying on a static, globally fixed fusion ratio, the model evaluates the integrity of the spatial and frequency streams
for each incoming sample. If spatial cues are degraded by compression, the attention heads dynamically shift the decision
weight to the frequency-domain stream (and vice versa), ensuring high forensic resilience.
Architectural and Computational Efficiency
Practical deepfake detection pipelines demand not only accuracy but also computational efficiency to handle high-throughput
streams. Multi-domain analysis is often criticized for introducing heavy, redundant backbones that increase inference latency.
Our framework addresses this challenge: the specialized frequency sub-model operates on only approximately 1.7 million
21/25

--- PAGE 22 ---
parameters. This lightweight footprint demonstrates that capturing complex spectral inconsistencies does not necessitate
massive, over-parameterized architectures, facilitating low-latency deployment without sacrificing detection sensitivity.
Limitations and Future Directions
While the proposed framework achieves strong empirical performance against standard baselines, we acknowledge specific
limitations in the current comparative and dataset scope. Our evaluation primarily benchmarked the MHA fusion against its
component backbones (Wang2020 and Wolter Wavelets) and the Xception baseline.
While the current large-scale dataset provides robust foundational evidence for the MHA framework, validation against
unseen data sources, unknown generative models, and unpredictable web-compression pipelines remains an essential area of
future study. The current evaluation does not fully capture the complexity of uncontrolled real-world distribution scenarios.
Therefore, a critical avenue for future work involves conducting comprehensive cross-dataset and cross-domain evaluations
using independent, massive-scale external benchmarks. Specifically, validating the framework against the Deepfake Detection
Challenge (DFDC), WildDeepfake, and Deepfake-Eval-2024 datasets will be valuable to further explore the model’s capabilities
for practical, real-world deployment. Furthermore, while our augmentations address baseline degradation, robustness against
stronger attacks, cross-compression settings, arbitrary resizing, multi-stage social-media recompression, and unseen zero-shot
GAN/diffusion generators requires further investigation before open-world deployment.
Adversarial Vulnerabilities and Defense Regimens
Our evaluation under the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) attack highlights the ongoing adversarial arms race in synthetic
media forensics. While the frequency-domain stream provides a strong natural defense against basic white-box perturbations—
retaining a robust AUC near 0.90 under mild attacks—the model remains vulnerable to targeted adversarial optimization.
Consequently, a critical future direction is the incorporation of multi-step adversarial training regimens (such as PGD) and
adversarial purification layers into the training pipeline to defend against adaptive attackers trying to bypass detection.
The Ethical Imperative and Demographic Fairness Auditing
Beyond technical robustness, deploying deepfake detection models at scale carries significant ethical responsibilities. To
prevent biased classification rates, it is imperative to conduct thorough fairness audits. However, current benchmark datasets
lack consistent, ground-truth demographic metadata. Before these models can be ethically integrated into public platforms,
the research community must establish benchmark standards containing demographic labels to audit and guarantee equitable
performance across diverse ages, genders, and ethnicities.
To manage the substantial computational and engineering overhead of parsing and scaling the model to such massive
datasets, future iterations will explore the integration of autonomous coding sub-agents. These sub-agents can automate data
preprocessing, pipeline scheduling, and resource allocation, facilitating a much smoother and more efficient experimentation
process.
Importantly, our MHA-based design has proven highly promising for future extensibility. Because the fusion core treats
individual detection models as modular sub-models, superior baselines developed in the future can simply be integrated as
additional expert streams. The MHA framework is designed to enable future advanced models to benefit from dynamic
cross-domain fusion. This modular scalability makes our approach a promising foundation for adaptable deepfake detection.
Funding
The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript. Open access
funding was provided by the Science, Technology & Innovation Funding Authority (STDF) in cooperation with the Egyptian
Knowledge Bank (EKB).
References
1. Ho, J., Jain, A. & Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33, 6840–6851 (2020).
2.Song, J., Meng, C. & Ermon, S. Denoising diffusion implicit models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502(2020).
3. Dhariwal, P. & Nichol, A. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems34, 8780–8794 (2021).
4. Wang, S.-Y ., Wang, O., Zhang, R., Owens, A. & Efros, A. A. CNN-generated images are surprisingly easy to spot... for
now. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 8695–8704 (2020).
5. Ricker, J., Damm, S., Holz, T. & Fischer, A. Towards the detection of diffusion model deepfakes.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.14571(2022).
22/25

--- PAGE 23 ---
6. Lin, H., Luo, W., Wei, K. & Liu, M. Improved Xception with dual attention mechanism and feature fusion for face forgery
detection.IEEE(2022).
7. Yang, S., Guo, H., Hu, S., Zhu, B., Fu, Y ., Lyu, S., Wu, X. & Wang, X. CrossDF: Improving cross-domain deepfake
detection with deep information decomposition.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00359(2023).
8. Wolter, M., Blanke, F., Heese, R. & Garcke, J. Wavelet-packets for deepfake image analysis and detection.Machine
Learning111, 4295–4327 (2022).
9.Chen, Z. DiffFace - part1 [Data set].Zenodo(2024).https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10865300.
10.Chen, Z. DiffFace - part2 [Data set].Zenodo(2020).https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10865065.
11. Khalid, H., Tariq, S., Kim, M. & Woo, S. S. FakeA VCeleb: A novel audio-video multimodal deepfake dataset.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.05080(2021).
12. Rössler, A., Cozzolino, D., Verdoliva, L., Riess, C., Thies, J. & Nießner, M. Faceforensics++: Learning to detect
manipulated facial images. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 1–11 (2019).
13. Wang, Y ., Chen, X., Zhu, J., Chu, W., Tai, Y ., Wang, C., Li, J., Wu, Y ., Huang, F. & Ji, R. HifiFace: 3D shape and semantic
prior guided high fidelity face swapping.arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09965(2021).
14. Szegedy, C., Ioffe, S., Vanhoucke, V . & Alemi, A. A. Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections
on learning. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence(2017).
15. Chandra, N. A. et al. Deepfake-eval-2024: A multi-modal in-the-wild benchmark of deepfakes circulated in 2024.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.02857(2025).
16. Zhao, W., Rao, Y ., Shi, W., Liu, Z., Zhou, J. & Lu, J. Diffswap: High-fidelity and controllable face swapping via 3D-aware
masked diffusion. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 8568–8577
(2023).
17. Zhu, Y ., Li, Q., Wang, J., Xu, C. & Sun, Z. One shot face swapping on megapixels. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 4834–4844 (2021).
18. Thies, J., Zollhöfer, M., Stamminger, M., Theobalt, C. & Nießner, M. Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment
of RGB videos. InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2387–2395 (2016).
19. Li, M., Yuan, G., Wang, C., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y ., Nie, Y ., Wang, J. & Xu, D. E4s: Fine-grained face swapping via editing
with regional GAN inversion.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15081(2023).
20. Li, L., Bao, J., Yang, H., Chen, D. & Wen, F. Faceshifter: Towards high fidelity and occlusion aware face swapping.arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.13457(2019).
21. Kim, K., Kim, Y ., Cho, S., Seo, J., Nam, J., Lee, K., Kim, S. & Lee, K. Diffface: Diffusion-based face swapping with facial
guidance.Pattern Recognition163, 111451 (2025).
22. Ye, F., Hua, M., Zhang, P., Li, X., Sun, Q., Zhao, S., He, Q. & Wu, X. DreamID: High-Fidelity and Fast diffusion-based
Face Swapping via Triplet ID Group Learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14509(2025).
23. Shao, H., Wang, S., Zhou, Y ., Song, G., He, D., Qin, S., Zong, Z., Ma, B., Liu, Y . & Li, H. VividFace: A Diffusion-Based
Hybrid Framework for High-Fidelity Video Face Swapping.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11279(2024).
24. Afchar, D., Nozick, V ., Yamagishi, J. & Echizen, I. MesoNet: a compact facial video forgery detection network. In2018
IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security (WIFS), 1–7 (2018).
25. Wang, S.-Y . CNNDetection GitHub Repository. (2020). https://github.com/PeterWang512/
CNNDetection.git.
26. Hassan, A. CNNDetection Retraining and Fusion Framework.Zenodo(2026). https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.21323779.
27. Standley, T. Xception PyTorch GitHub Repository. (2017). https://github.com/tstandley/
Xception-PyTorch.git.
28. Chollet, F. Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions. InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1251–1258 (2017).
29. Ye, W., He, X. & Ding, F. Decoupling forgery semantics for generalizable deepfake detection.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09739(2024).
23/25

--- PAGE 24 ---
30. Soudy, A. H., Sayed, O., Tag-Elser, H., Ragab, R., Mohsen, S., Mostafa, T. A. H., Abohany, A. A. & Slim, S. O. Deepfake
detection using convolutional vision transformers and convolutional neural networks.Neural Computing and Applications
36, 19759–19775 (2024).
31. Yan, Z., Zhang, Y ., Fan, Y . & Wu, B. UCF: Uncovering common features for generalizable deepfake detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 22412–22423 (2023).
Reproducibility and Environment Specifications
To ensure the reproducibility of our experimental results and facilitate independent verification, we provide complete software
and hardware environment specifications, alongside a structured reproduction protocol.
Hardware Environment
All stages of the experimental pipeline were conducted across three hardware configurations, validating both resource-
constrained prototyping and synchronized multi-GPU training:
1. Prototyping & Development Stage:A local workstation equipped with a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 GPU
(12 GB GDDR6 VRAM), an Intel Core i5-12400 CPU (6 cores, 12 threads), 32 GB DDR4 RAM, and 2 TB HDD storage.
2. Production Training & Main Evaluation Stage:A homogeneous cloud-based multi-GPU cluster consisting of two
NVIDIA Tensor Core T4 GPUs (16 GB GDDR6 VRAM each) interconnected via PCIe Gen3. Gradient synchronization
and data distribution were managed using PyTorch’s native DistributedDataParallel (DDP) API, ensuring
statistical stability across parallel batches.
3. Cross-Hardware Verification Stage:An isolated cloud instance featuring a single NVIDIA Ada Lovelace L4 GPU
(24 GB GDDR6 VRAM). This was used to verify the runtime metrics and confirm the hardware-agnostic stability of the
model, which exhibited negligible metric variance (0.5% to 1.0%) compared to the multi-GPU setup.
Software Environment and Dependencies
The software stack was standardized to prevent dependency-induced discrepancies. The complete environment is defined by the
following specifications:
•Operating System:Windows 10/11 and Linux (Ubuntu 20.04 LTS or newer).
•Python Version:≥3.11 (specifically tested and executed on Python 3.11.0).
•CUDA Support:CUDA Runtime version 12.1.
•Core Libraries:PyTorch v2.5.1 and torchvision v0.20.1, both compiled with CUDA 12.1 support.
The exact versions of auxiliary Python libraries used for data loading, preprocessing, and metric evaluation are detailed in
Table 13.
Table 13.Complete software dependency and package version specifications.
Library Name Minimum Version Primary Purpose in Pipeline
torch 2.5.1 Core deep learning framework and tensor operations
torchvision 0.20.1 Data loading utilities and image transformations
numpy 2.4.4 Multi-dimensional numerical arrays and calculations
pytorch-wavelets 1.3.0 GPU-accelerated Discrete Wavelet Transforms
pywavelets 1.9.0 CPU-based reference wavelet packet decompositions
scikit-learn 1.9.0 Evaluation metric calculations (EER, AUC, F1)
opencv-python 5.0.0.93 Real-time image decoding and augmentations
pillow 12.2.0 Image processing and basic loading checks
matplotlib 3.11.0 Metric visualization (ROC, PR, Confusion Matrix)
scipy 1.17.1 Mathematical utilities and signal processing algorithms
pyyaml 6.0.3 Parsing configuration files and CLI overrides
tensorboard 2.21.0 Logging training progress and metric visualization
tqdm 4.68.3 Console-based execution progress tracking
24/25

--- PAGE 25 ---
Dataset and Preprocessing Specifications
The training and validation datasets9–11 must follow a standardized two-level hierarchical folder structure compatible with
PyTorch’sImageFolderrepresentation:
•Directory Layout:Root folders namedtrainandval, each containing two subfolders namedrealandfake.
• Image Preprocessing:Images are dynamically resized to a fixed resolution of 224×224 pixels. Normalization
is performed on input tensors using the ImageNet channel-wise mean ( [0.485,0.456,0.406] ) and standard deviation
([0.229,0.224,0.225]).
Step-by-Step Reproduction Protocol
The source code, training configurations, and evaluation scripts are publicly archived at26. To reproduce the experiments:
1. Cloning and Virtual Environment Setup:Clone the codebase and initialize a Python environment using either the
package manageruv(recommended for deterministic package resolution viauv.lock) or standardpip:
git clone <repository_url> && cd "Novel Deepfake Detection"
# Option A: Fast installation via uv
uv venv && .venv\Scripts\activate
uv sync
# Option B: Standard installation via pip
python -m venv .venv && .venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
2. Phase 1: Base Model Training (128-D Embeddings):Train the backbone models (Wang2020, Wolter Wavelet,
Xception, ConvNeXt) to output 128-D embeddings:
python train.py --arch Wang2020_128 --dataroot "path/to/train" --val_root "path/to/val"
python train.py --arch WolterWavelet2021_128 --dataroot "path/to/train" ...
python train.py --arch Xception_128 --dataroot "path/to/train" ...
python train.py --arch ConvNeXt_128 --dataroot "path/to/train" ...
3. Phase 2 & 3: Fusion and Multi-Head Attention Model Training:Train the fusion networks (e.g., MHA_WWXC) by
providing paths to the pre-trained checkpoints:
python train.py --arch MHA_WWXC --dataroot "path/to/train" --val_root "path/to/val" \
--rgb_model_path "experiments/wang2020_128_run/checkpoints/best.pth" \
--wavelet_model_path "experiments/wolter_128_run/checkpoints/best.pth" \
--xception_model_path "experiments/xception_128_run/checkpoints/best.pth" \
--convnext_model_path "experiments/convnext_128_run/checkpoints/best.pth" \
--freeze_base_models
4. Phase 4 & 5: Model Evaluation and Robustness Assessment:Run comparative evaluations and test model robustness
against adversarial perturbations (FGSM, PGD) and anti-forensic operations (JPEG compression, blur, noise):
# Comprehensive evaluation & report generation
python evaluate.py --val_root "path/to/val" --mha_wwxc "path/to/best_mha.pth" ...
# Robustness testing
python evaluate_robustness.py --val_root "path/to/val" --mha_wwxc "path/to/best_mha.pth" ...
25/25